docs: grab workload version in k8s tutorial (#2559)
canonical/operator: docs/tutorial/from-zero-to-hero-write-your-first-kubernetes-charm/create-a-minimal-kubernetes-charm.md

1. The same Juju controller injects Pebble -- a lightweight, API-driven process supervisor -- into each workload container and overrides the container entrypoint so that Pebble starts when the container is ready.
1. When the Kubernetes API reports that a workload container is ready, the Juju controller informs the charm that the instance of Pebble in that container is ready. At that point, the charm knows that it can start communicating with Pebble.
1. Typically, at this point the charm will make calls to Pebble so that Pebble can configure and start the workload and begin operations.

> 1. During operations, the charm may need to directly communicate with the workload using HTTP requests. This is possible because the charm container and workload container share the same pod.

Reviewer: Not quite accurate since you can make HTTP requests between pods with the correct ceremony. Perhaps we mean to say that we can communicate using `localhost` ([docs](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/#pod-networking))?

Author: Yep, you are right.

I will switch to "localhost" here. This also aligns with our decision on using `localhost` in the `get_version` helper function.

> 1. Besides Pebble exec, the charm can communicate to the workload using HTTP requests. This is possible because they share the same pod (Kubernetes charms are deployed following sidecar pattern).  

Reviewer 2: I think it's good to make this feel more sequential, following on from "begin operations" in the previous item. Also I don't think we need to mention the sidecar pattern, as item 1 essentially explains it.

```suggestion
1. During operations, the charm may need to directly communicate with the workload using HTTP requests. This is possible because the charm container and workload container share the same pod.
```

> 1. After that, our workload, the `api_demo_server` app, serves on the deployed IP on port 8000. The charm can reach that endpoint because our charm container and the workload container are deployed in the same pod.  

Author: I shouldn't mention about the `api_demo_server` app here, and keep it general. I will rewrite it.

    upstream-source: ghcr.io/canonical/api_demo_server:1.0.4
```

### Write a helper module

> Your charm will interact with our workload application `api_demo_server`. It’s a good idea to write a helper module that wraps `api_demo_server`. Charmcraft created `src/fastapi_demo.py` as a placeholder helper module.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Your charm will interact with our workload application `api_demo_server`. It's a good idea to write a helper module that wraps `api_demo_server`. Charmcraft created `src/fastapi_demo.py` as a placeholder helper module.
```

The helper module will be independent of the main logic of your charm. This will make it easier to test your charm. In this tutorial, the helper module only contains the logic to get the version of `api_demo_server`. The server has an endpoint at `/version` that returns a JSON payload containing the version number (see {ref}`study-your-application`).

> This is called the workload version. To make things easier for Juju admins, our charm should expose the workload version to Juju. It will be visible in `juju status`. For more information, see {ref}`how-to-set-the-workload-version`.

Reviewer 2: I'm OK to drop the reference link because people typically follow in sequence and there's not much be gained by jumping back at this point.

A couple of other suggestions: It's best to use the term "Juju users" instead of admins (although we still say "admins" in a bunch of places for historical reasons). I recommend changing `juju status` because we haven't introduced this command yet.

```suggestion
The helper module will be independent of the main logic of your charm. This will make it easier to test your charm. In this tutorial, the helper module only contains the logic to get the version of `api_demo_server`. The server has an endpoint at `/version` that returns a JSON payload containing the version number. This is called the workload version.

To make things easier for Juju users, your charm should expose the workload version to Juju. It will be visible in Juju's status output. For more information, see {ref}`how-to-set-the-workload-version`.
```

> We first define a function to get the workload version. Replace the content of `src/fastapi_demo.py` with:

Reviewer 2: I think the first sentence can be dropped because we've already said what what we're going to do (and the code is short and clear enough)

```suggestion
Replace the content of `src/fastapi_demo.py` with:
```

```python
import json
import logging
import urllib.request

logger = logging.getLogger(__name__)

def get_version(port: int) -> str:

>     """Get the version of fastapi_demo installed.

Author: ```suggestion
    """Get the version of api_demo_server installed.
```
I should double check other places too.

Author: On second thought, we should use `fastapi_demo` to keep it consistent with the module name `fastapi_demo.py`.

>     """Get the version of fastapi_demo installed.

Reviewer 2: How about this instead?

```suggestion
    """Get the version of fastapi_demo that is running.
```

    Args:
        port: The port where fastapi_demo web server is listening.
    """
    response = urllib.request.urlopen(f"http://0.0.0.0:{port}/version")
    data = json.loads(response.read())
    return data["version"]
```

> The `get_version` function sends a HTTP GET to `api_demo_server` in the workload container, decodes the result JSON payload, and extracts the version string.

Reviewer 2: Personally, I would remove this sentence, as I think the code shows it clearly enough. But I could be too familiar with what's going on. Up to you.

If you decide to remove the sentence, maybe expand the docstring to "Get the version of fastapi_demo that is running in the workload container".

And I'd switch "a HTTP" to "an HTTP" for consistency with later in the doc (avoiding a big linguistic debate 😆)

Author: > And I'd switch "a HTTP" to "an HTTP" for consistency with later in the doc (avoiding a big linguistic debate 😆)

Oh, thanks for pointing that out :smile: . I really wasn't aware of it hahaha.

I agree with you to remove the this sentence, as it doesn't add much benefit. We can also avoid maintaining this this description on top of the code.

Notice that the helper module is stateless. In fact, your charm as a whole will be stateless. The main logic of your charm will:

1. Receive an event from Juju.

> 2. Use the functions in the helper module to manage `api_demo_server` and check its status.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Use Pebble calls and the helper module to manage `api_demo_server` and check its status.
```

    upstream-source: ghcr.io/canonical/api_demo_server:1.0.4
```

### Write a helper module

> Your charm will interact with our workload application `api_demo_server`. It's a good idea to write a helper module that wraps `api_demo_server`. Charmcraft created `src/fastapi_demo.py` as a placeholder helper module.

Reviewer: Why the name discrepancy? If the workload is `api_demo_server` then shouldn't that be the name we pass to `charmcraft init`?

Reviewer 2: This is a historical mismatch between the workload and charm names. I agree it's slightly confusing. If we want to change the name of the charm, a dedicated find-and-replace PR would be best I think.

Author: I was referring to the application we deployed in the workload container. I picked `api_demo_server` because it's the name of the OCI image, and the [git repo](https://github.com/canonical/api_demo_server/).

I thought about `fastapi-demo` as defined in `charmcraft.yaml`. But I view it as the charm's name, and not the workload application.

I also think this name discrepancy can be confusing for readers. May I suggests renaming `api_demo_server` to "workload application" in my changes here? It is still clear I think, and leave room for cleaning up later.

Reviewer 2: "Workload application" sounds good to me for now - good idea.

    return ops.pebble.Layer(pebble_layer)
```

### Set the workload version

> The workload version is available after the workload starts, which is after Pebble reevaluates its plan. We will use the `src/fastapi_demo.py` helper module for this step.

Reviewer 2: Very minor suggestions

```suggestion
The workload version is available after the workload starts, which happens after Pebble reevaluates its plan. We'll use the `src/fastapi_demo.py` helper module for this step.
```

> In `src/charm.py`, add `import fastapi_demo` in the imports at the top of the file. Then append the following lines to the `_on_demo_server_pebble_ready` function:

Reviewer 2: Normally there's no need to worry about the import, as it should already be there from the Charmcraft profile. See https://github.com/canonical/charmcraft/blob/main/charmcraft/templates/init-kubernetes/src/charm.py.j2#L13

But we've lost it thanks to the "Deploy your charm" step. I'm not sure what's best, but I lean towards updating the code in "Deploy your charm" so that it keeps the import. What do you think? Then making an edit here:

```suggestion
In `src/charm.py`, append the following lines to the `_on_demo_server_pebble_ready` function:
```

Author: I will go with your suggestion. I also lean towards changing the code snippet, and then we can remove the redundant `add import fastapi_demo` part.  

> updating the code in "Deploy your charm" 

I assume you are referring to "Define the charm class" where we first introduce `src/charm.py`?

Reviewer 2: > I assume you are referring to "Define the charm class" where we first introduce `src/charm.py`?

Yes, I had "Define the charm class" in mind but must have copied a different heading that looked close enough!

```python
def _on_demo_server_pebble_ready(self, event: ops.PebbleReadyEvent) -> None:
    # ... previous lines ...
    # Set the workload version of this charm.
    version = fastapi_demo.get_version(port=8000)

>     self.unit.set_workload_version(version)

Reviewer 2: We're considering updating the tutorial to pull in code from the charm source files, rather than having the code in the doc source, so I think it's best to reduce this to just the relevant lines (which I feel should be clear enough):

```suggestion
    # Set the workload version of this charm.
    version = fastapi_demo.get_version(port=8000)
    self.unit.set_workload_version(version)
```

Author: Sounds good to me! I will reduce it. I will also remove the indentation as it is not necessary anymore. The final version will be 

````
In `src/charm.py`, append the following lines to the `_on_demo_server_pebble_ready` function:

```python
# Set the workload version of this charm.
version = fastapi_demo.get_version(port=8000)
self.unit.set_workload_version(version)
```
````

```

> We invoke `fastapi_demo.get_version` to get the workload version, and expose it to Juju with `self.unit.set_workload_version`. We use port 8000 as the app is deployed on this port, as seen in `_get_pebble_layer`.

Reviewer 2: I'd drop the explanation of `fastapi_demo.get_version`, but keep `self.unit.set_workload_version` because that will be a novel function for people. Also how about this restructuring?

```suggestion
We get the workload version over port 8000 because `_get_pebble_layer` deploys the app on this port. Then `self.unit.set_workload_version` exposes the workload version to Juju.
```

Author: That works really well! Thank you. I will go with this version. I agree with removing `fastapi_demo.get_version`

    return ops.pebble.Layer(pebble_layer)
```

### Set the workload version

The workload version is available after the workload starts, which is after Pebble reevaluates its plan. We will use the `src/fastapi_demo.py` helper module for this step.

In `src/charm.py`, add `import fastapi_demo` in the imports at the top of the file. Then modify the `_on_demo_server_pebble_ready` function:

```python
def _on_demo_server_pebble_ready(self, event: ops.PebbleReadyEvent) -> None:
    """Define and start a workload using the Pebble API."""
    # Get a reference the container attribute on the PebbleReadyEvent
    container = event.workload
    # Add initial Pebble config layer using the Pebble API
    container.add_layer("fastapi_demo", self._get_pebble_layer(), combine=True)
    # Make Pebble reevaluate its plan, ensuring any services are started if enabled.
    container.replan()
    # Set the workload version of this charm.
    version = fastapi_demo.get_version(port=8000)
    self.unit.set_workload_version(version)
    # Learn more about statuses at
    # https://documentation.ubuntu.com/juju/3.6/reference/status/

>     self.unit.status = ops.ActiveStatus()

Reviewer 3: It's hard to tell what's being added here. Could we consider something like this?

```suggestion
def _on_demo_server_pebble_ready(self, event: ops.PebbleReadyEvent) -> None:
    # ... previous lines ...
    # Set the workload version of this charm.
    version = fastapi_demo.get_version(port=8000)
    self.unit.set_workload_version(version)
```

    return ops.pebble.Layer(pebble_layer)
```

### Set the workload version

The workload version is available after the workload starts, which happens after Pebble reevaluates its plan. We'll use the `src/fastapi_demo.py` helper module for this step.

In `src/charm.py`, append the following lines to the `_on_demo_server_pebble_ready` function:

```python
# Set the workload version of this charm.
version = fastapi_demo.get_version(port=8000)
self.unit.set_workload_version(version)

> ```

Reviewer: Minor: I guess we don't introduce error handling here, because we introduce setting statuses later. That makes sense, but I wonder if it's worth mentioning. Perhaps not, but WDYT about something like "For simplicitly, we'll assume there's no `URLError` for now. In the next chapter we'll introduce Juju statuses and error handling."

Author: We decided to let the errors bubble up, so we won't have error handling for this `get_version` function anymore.

However, I can add a paragraph saying "For simplicitly, we will let any exception bubble up and handled by Juju.", or something similar ?

Reviewer 2: In the machine charm tutorial we have this comment. Maybe a similar one can work here?

```py
raise RuntimeError("tinyproxy was not running within the expected time")
# Raising a runtime error will put the charm into error status.
# The Juju logs will show the error message, to help you debug the error.
```

_Edit:_ Also this one, which is maybe closer to what we want here:

```py
apt.add_package("tinyproxy-bin", "1.11.1-3")
# If this call fails, the charm will go into error status. The Juju logs will show the error:
# charmlibs.apt.PackageError: Failed to install packages: tinyproxy-bin
```

Author: Ah thanks. Those would work really well.

I will draft something following your examples.

> We get the workload version over port 8000 because `_get_pebble_layer` deploys the app on this port. Then `self.unit.set_workload_version` exposes the workload version to Juju.

Reviewer: Minor: Is it worth factoring out the port number into a constant? e.g. global `_WORKLOAD_PORT`, referred to in both the Pebble layer and here. Perhaps not since the duplication goes away once we start pulling the workload from config.

Author: I also think it doesn't bring a big benefit. I originally used `port=8000` to keep this snippet tight in scope, and easy to grasp for readers.

So I would prefer to keep it.

juju status --watch 1s
```

> When all units are settled down, you should see the output below, where `10.152.183.215` is the IP of the K8s Service and `10.1.157.73` is the IP of the pod. The workload version is located in the `Version` column.

Reviewer 2: Suggest clarifying as there are two Version columns in the output:

```suggestion
When all units are settled down, you should see the output below, where `10.152.183.215` is the IP of the K8s Service and `10.1.157.73` is the IP of the pod. The workload version is located in the app's `Version` column.
```

Author: Will do. Thanks for the catch.

> When all units are settled down, you should see the output below, where `10.152.183.215` is the IP of the K8s Service and `10.1.157.73` is the IP of the pod. The workload version is `1.0.4`, as seen in the `Version` column.

Author: ```suggestion
When all units are settled down, you should see the output below, where `10.152.183.215` is the IP of the K8s Service and `10.1.157.73` is the IP of the pod. The workload version is located in the `Version` column.
```

```text
Model    Controller     Cloud/Region  Version  SLA          Timestamp
testing  concierge-k8s  k8s           3.6.13   unsupported  13:38:19+01:00

App           Version  Status  Scale  Charm         Channel  Rev  Address         Exposed  Message

> fastapi-demo  1.0.4    active      1  fastapi-demo             0  10.152.183.215  no

Author: Should I go with a general version here, instead of hard-coding? 
```suggestion
fastapi-demo  1.*.*    active      1  fastapi-demo             0  10.152.183.215  no
```
Alternatively, I can add a small note saying that this workload version can be different on the readers machine.

I prefer going with a general version. But I'm not against the second approach.

Reviewer 2: I think showing 1.0.4 is fine as you have it. No further explanation needed. We control `api_demo_server`, and when we release a new version we go through and update the tutorial.

In the output you should see the definition for both containers. You'll be able to verify that the default command and arguments for our application container (`demo-server`) have been displaced by the Pebble service. You should be able to verify the same for the charm container (`charm`).

> ### Set your workload version

Author: I put this section here because it builds on top of the previous sections:
- Pack and deploy the charm
- Using `curl` to fetch the version from the fastapi server
- Viewing `juju status`. With the workload version set, you can see the difference in the `Version` column, which I highlight in this section.

But please let me know if it's better to merge into the previous sections instead.

Author: @dwilding Sorry for tagging you into a Draft PR. Just want to have your opinion on:
- Is is better to keep "grab workload version" in its own section, or merge it to the previous steps. I am leaning toward "merging", to keep it consistent with the machine charm tutorial.
- The overall structure of this PR: I want to finalize it first before updating the remaining chapters.

Thank you very much :smile:

Reviewer 2: Don't worry about the ping, very happy to discuss 🙂 

By merging, do you mean adding a subsection within "Write your charm", so that the version grabbing behaviour is in the charm from the very first `charmcraft pack`? I would lean towards that too. I think a single pack in this chapter is better.

I think putting a subsection before "Define the charm class" would make sense, similar to the machine charm tutorial.

For the explanation of how a charm communicates with its workload - "...the charm container is in the same pod as the workload..." - I'd consider shifting that to the chapter introduction that talks about how K8s charms work. That introduction currently says "...managing the workload application in various ways via Pebble", which could get confusing if we suddenly introduce a non-Pebble way to talk to the workload. It would be best to explain both aspects of workload management/communication in the same place.

Author: Thanks David! 

I have added a subsection within `Write your charm` to discuss about the helper module, following the machine charm tutorial. 

I also brought the discussion about charm container reaching workload container to the very beginning of the tutorial. I hope it is much better now.

```python
import ops
import pytest
from ops import testing

from charm import FastAPIDemoCharm

def mock_get_version(port: int):
    """Get a mock version string without executing the workload code."""

>     return "1.0.4"

Reviewer 2: Let's make this an obviously mock version number. Something like:

```suggestion
    return "0.0.1"
```

        state_out.get_container(container.name).service_statuses["fastapi-service"]
        == ops.pebble.ServiceStatus.ACTIVE
    )
    # Check the workload version is set
    assert state_out.workload_version is not None
```

This test checks the behaviour of the `_on_demo_server_pebble_ready` function that you set up earlier. The test simulates your charm receiving the pebble-ready event, then checks that the unit and workload container have the correct state.

> In unit tests, we avoid any interaction with the outside world to keep the unit tests deterministic. The `get_version` method performs a HTTP call, which must be patched. We use the fixture `mock_version` to achieve this. From now on, any unit test on the charm needs to use fixture.

Reviewer 2: Also keeps them fast 😁 I think it's fine to reduce.

This statement isn't _necessarily_ true: "From now on, any unit test on the charm needs to use fixture". It depends on which event is being testing, and also whether we've defined a collect-status handler gets the version (which would then run after any other event). I think it's best to avoid mentioning it in this chapter - we can address the topic later when it comes up.

```suggestion
In unit tests, we avoid any interaction with the outside world. The `get_version` method performs an HTTP call, which must be patched. We use the `mock_version` fixture to achieve this.
```

    }
    juju.deploy(charm, app=APP_NAME, resources=resources)
    juju.wait(jubilant.all_active)

def test_workload_version_is_set(juju: jubilant.Juju):
    # Verify that the workload version has been set.
    version = juju.status().apps["fastapi-demo"].version
    # Ideally, the test should get the version directly from the workload application
    # (for example, through an API call) and use that in this assertion.
    # For simplicity, we hardcode the major version here to avoid updates
    # if api_demo_server is updated with a minor or patch release.

>     assert version.startswith("1.")

Reviewer 2: I know `1.` came from Ben's suggestion, but I disagree 😉 

The next version of `api_demo_server` will likely be `2.x`. And we're already committed to finding-and-replacing version numbers when we release a new version of the server. So it would actually be easier if this stayed as `version == "1.0.4"`.

Reviewer 3: That's fine, thanks David -- let's keep it `version == '1.0.4'`

    }
    juju.deploy(charm, app=APP_NAME, resources=resources)
    juju.wait(jubilant.all_active)

def test_workload_version_is_set(juju: jubilant.Juju):
    # Verify that the workload version has been set.

>     version = juju.status().apps["fastapi-demo"].version

Reviewer 2: One more thing I just thought of. `"fastapi-demo"` can be `APP_NAME` instead. Here and in all the example charm test files.

>     version = juju.status().apps["fastapi-demo"].version

Reviewer 2: One more thing I just thought of. `"fastapi-demo"` can be `APP_NAME` instead. Here and in all the example charm test files.

    # Ideally, the test should get the version directly from the workload application
    # (for example, through an API call) and use that in this assertion.
    # For simplicity, we hardcode the version here. We update the tutorial whenever we

>     # release a new version of api_demo_server.

Reviewer: I don't know that this whole comment is needed here. Perhaps:
```suggestion
    # Hardcoded version for simplicity. Ideally we'd get the version directly from the workload.
```

Author: You are right. We should simplify it in the tutorial to prevent confusion. I will update it.

I initially made this comment following the example here - https://canonical.com/juju/docs/ops/latest/howto/manage-the-workload-version/#write-integration-tests.

    }
    juju.deploy(charm, app=APP_NAME, resources=resources)
    juju.wait(jubilant.all_active)

def test_workload_version_is_set(juju: jubilant.Juju):
    # Verify that the workload version has been set.
    version = juju.status().apps["fastapi-demo"].version
    # We'll need to update this version every time we upgrade to a new workload
    # version. If the workload has an API or some other way of getting the
    # version, the test should get it from there and use that to compare to the
    # unit setting.

>     assert version == "1.0.4"

Reviewer 3: Consider using something a bit more general, to avoid updates if the demo-server is updated with a minor or patch release:

```suggestion
    assert version.startswith("1.")
```
